[1mNAME[0m

[1mzfsbootmenu[0m - Snapshot Management

[1mKeyboard Shortcuts[0m

[33m[ENTER][0m [1mduplicate[0m
  Creation method: [33mzfs send | zfs recv[0m

  This creates a boot environment that does not depend on any other snapshots, allowing it to
  be destroyed at will. The new boot environment will immediately consume space on the pool
  equal to the [33mREFER[0m value of the snapshot.

  A duplicated boot environment is commonly used if you need a new boot environment without
  any associated snapshots.

  The operation will fail gracefully if the pool can not be set [33mread/write[0m.

  If [33mmbuffer[0m is available, it is used to provide feedback.

[33m[MOD+X][0m [1mclone and promote[0m
  Creation method: [33mzfs clone , zfs promote[0m

  This creates a boot environment that is not dependent on the origin snapshot, allowing you
  to destroy the file system that the clone was created from. A cloned and promoted boot
  environment is commonly used when you've done an upgrade but want to preserve historical
  snapshots.

  The operation will fail gracefully if the pool can not be set [33mread/write[0m.

[33m[MOD+C][0m [1mclone[0m
  Creation method: [33mzfs clone[0m

  This creates a boot environment from a snapshot with out modifying snapshot inheritence. A
  cloned boot environment is commonly used if you need to boot a previous system state for a
  short time and then discard the environment.

  The operation will fail gracefully if the pool can not be set [33mread/write[0m.

[33m[MOD+D][0m [1mdiff[0m
  Compare the differences between the selected snapshot and the current state of the boot
  environment.

  The operation will fail gracefully if the pool can not be set [33mread/write[0m.

[33m[MOD+J][0m [1mjump into chroot[0m
  Enter a chroot of the selected boot environment snapshot. The snapshot is always mounted
  read-only.

[33m[MOD+O][0m [1msort order[0m
  Cycle the sorting key through the following list:

  [1mname[0m Use the filesystem or snapshot name
  [1mcreation[0m Use the filesystem or snapshot creation time
  [1mused[0m Use the filesystem or snapshot size

  The default sort key is [33mname[0m.

[33m[MOD+L][0m [1mview logs[0m
  View logs, as indicated by [33m[!][0m. The indicator will be yellow for warning conditions and red
  for errors.

[1mAUTHOR[0m

ZFSBootMenu Team <https://github.com/zbm-dev/zfsbootmenu>

