=head1 NAME

B<zbm-efi-kcl> - manipulate kernel command lines for EFI binaries

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<zbm-efi-kcl> [-f <kcl-file>] [-k <kcl-text>] [-o <output>] -e <input>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The B<zbm-efi-kcl> utility allows review and manipulation of the embedded kernel command line value present in ZFSBootMenu EFI binaries. This value is used by most UEFI firmware implementations and bootloaders.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-e> I<input>

Define the EFI binary upon which to operate. This option is required.

=item B<-f> I<kcl-file>

Replace the embedded kernel command line with the contents of the file. This is primarily intended for automated changes to the EFI binary.

=item B<-k> I<kcl-text>

Replace the kernel command line with the quoted argument. Ensure proper shell quoting behavior is respected here.

=item B<-o> I<output>

After changing the embedded kernel command line, store the new EFI binary under a new file name. The input EFI binary is left unchanged.

=back

If neither B<-f> or B<-k> are provided, the command line from the input EFI binary will be opened in I<$EDITOR>.

=head1 EXAMPLES

Perform an in-place edit of the commandline in the release EFI binary:

  zbm-efi-kcl -e /boot/efi/EFI/BOOT/zfsbootmenu.EFI

Perform an edit and store the change in a new file:

  zbm-efi-kcl -e /boot/efi/EFI/boot/zfsbootmenu.EFI -o /boot/efi/EFI/boot/zfsbootmenu-testing.EFI

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<zfsbootmenu>(7)

=head1 AUTHOR

ZFSBootMenu Team L<https://github.com/zbm-dev/zfsbootmenu>

=cut
