=head1 NAME

B<zbm-kcl> - manipulate kernel command lines for ZFS boot environments

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<zbm-kcl> [OPTION]... [FILESYSTEM]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The B<zbm-kcl> utility allows review and manipulation of the I<org.zfsbootmenu:commandline> property on ZFS filesystems. ZFSBootMenu reads this property, as set or inherited on each environment that it recognizes, to set the command line for the kernel that it boots.

When a filesystem is not specified, B<zbm-kcl> will attempt to determine the root filesystem and operate on that.

With no options specified, B<zbm-kcl> will print the current value of I<org.zfsbootmenu:commandline> on the selected filesystem and exit.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-a> I<argument>

Append the value of I<argument> to the kernel command line. The value of I<argument> can be a simple variable name for Boolean arguments or may take the form I<var=value> to provide a non-Boolean value. If I<value> contains spaces, it may be surrounded by double quotes. In that case, surround the argument in single quotes to ensure that the double quotes are recorded in the property:

  zbm-kcl -a 'variable="some argument with spaces"'

This argument may be repeated any number of times.

=item B<-r> I<argument>

Remove I<argument> from the kernel command line. The value of I<argument> can be a simple variable name, in which case all arguments of the form I<argument> or I<argument=E<lt>arbitrary-valueE<gt>> will be stripped. Alternatively, a specific argument may be selected by specifying I<argument=E<lt>specific-valueE<gt>>.

This argument may be repeated any number of times.

B<NOTE:> All removal options are processed I<before> any append options are processed, making it possible to replace an existing argument by combining removal and append options into a single invocation of B<zbm-kcl>.

=item B<-e>

Open the contents of the command-line property in an interactive editor. If the environment defines I<$EDITOR>, that will be used; otherwise, B<vi> will be used by default. After making changes as desired, overwrite the (temporary) file that was opened and quit the editor. If the contents of the command-line property appear to have changed, B<zbm-kcl> will apply those changes.

=item B<-d>

Delete the command-line property by calling

  zfs inherit org.zfsbootmenu:commandline <filesystem>

This allows the boot environment to inherit any command-line property that may be defined by some parent.

=item B<-v>

Increase the verbosity of B<zbm-kcl> as it operates. This may be specified up to three times.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

Change the I<loglevel> value on the currently booted environment by removing any existing value from the command line and appending the desired argument:

  zbm-kcl -a loglevel=7 -r loglevel

Delete the entire command line from the I<zroot/ROOT/void> boot environment, allowing it to inherit a command line set at I<zroot> or I<zroot/ROOT> if either of these defines a value:

  zbm-kcl -d zroot/ROOT/void

Allow interactive editing of the command line on the I<zroot/ROOT> filesystem:

  zbm-kcl -e zroot/ROOT

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<zfsbootmenu>(7)

=head1 AUTHOR

ZFSBootMenu Team L<https://github.com/zbm-dev/zfsbootmenu>

=cut
