=pod

=head1 Main Screen

=over 2

=item I<[ENTER]> B<boot>

Boot the selected boot environment, with the listed kernel and kernel command line visible at the top of the screen.

=item I<[MOD+K]> B<kernels>

Access a list of kernels available in the boot environment.

=item I<[MOD+S]> B<snapshots>

Access a list of snapshots of the selected boot environment. New boot environments can be created here.

=item I<[MOD+D]> B<set bootfs>

Set the selected boot environment as the default for the pool.

The operation will fail gracefully if the pool can not be set I<read/write>.

=item I<[MOD+E]> B<edit kcl>

Temporarily edit the kernel command line that will be used to boot the chosen kernel in the selected boot environment. This change does not persist across reboots.

=item I<[MOD+P]> B<pool status>

View the health and status of each imported pool.

=item I<[MOD+R]> B<recovery shell>

Execute a Bash shell with minimal tooling, enabling system maintenance.

=item I<[MOD+I]> B<interactive chroot>

Enter a chroot of the selected boot environment. The boot environment is mounted I<read/write> if the zpool is imported I<read/write>.

=item I<[MOD+W]> B<import read/write>

If possible, the pool behind the selected boot environment is exported and then re-imported in I<read/write> mode.

This is not possible if any of the following conditions are met:

=over 2

=item *
 The version of ZFS in ZFSBootMenu has detected unsupported pool features, due to an upgraded pool.

=item *
 The system has an active B<resume>, indicating that the pool is currently in use.

=back

Upon successful re-import in I<read/write> mode, each of the boot environments on this pool will be highlighted in I<red> at the top of the screen.

=item I<[MOD+O]> B<sort order>

Cycle the sorting key through the following list:

=over 2

=item B<name> Use the filesystem or snapshot name

=item B<creation> Use the filesystem or snapshot creation time

=item B<used> Use the filesystem or snapshot size

=back

The default sort key is I<name>.

=item I<[MOD+L]> B<view logs>

View logs, as indicated by I<[!]>. The indicator will be yellow for warning conditions and red for errors.

=back

=head2 AUTHOR

ZFSBootMenu Team L<https://github.com/zbm-dev/zfsbootmenu>

=cut
