=head1 Keyboard Actions

=over 2

=item B<boot> I<[ENTER]>

Boot the selected boot environment, with the listed kernel and kernel command line visible at the top of the screen.

=item B<kernels> I<[MOD+K]>

Access a list of kernels available in the boot environment.

=item B<snapshots> I<[MOD+S]>

Access a list of snapshots of the selected boot environment. New boot environments can be created here.

=item B<set bootfs> I<[MOD+D]>

Set the selected boot environment as the default for the pool.

The operation will fail gracefully if the pool can not be set I<read/write>.

=item B<edit kcl> I<[MOD+E]>

Temporarily edit the kernel command line that will be used to boot the chosen kernel in the selected boot environment. This change does not persist across reboots.

=item B<pool status> I<[MOD+P]>

View the health and status of each imported pool.

=item B<recovery shell> I<[MOD+R]>

Execute a Bash shell with minimal tooling, enabling system maintenance.

=item B<interactive chroot> I<[MOD+I]>

Enter a chroot of the selected boot environment. The boot environment is mounted I<read/write> if the zpool is imported I<read/write>.

=item B<import read/write> I<[MOD+W]>

If possible, the pool behind the selected boot environment is exported and then re-imported in $( colorize red "read/write") mode.

This is not possible if any of the following conditions are met:

=over 4

=item *
 The version of ZFS in ZFSBootMenu has detected unsupported pool features, due to an upgraded pool.

=item *
 The system has an active $( colorize red "resume") image, indicating that the pool is currently in use.

=back

Upon successful re-import in I<read/write> mode, each of the boot environments on this pool will be highlighted in I<red> at the top of the screen.

=item B<sort order> I<[MOD+O]>

Cycle the sorting key through the following list:

=over 4

=item B<name> Use the filesystem or snapshot name
=item B<creation> Use the filesystem or snapshot creation time
=item B<used> Use the filesystem or snapshot size

=back

The default sort key is I<name>.

=item B<view logs> I<[MOD+L]>

View logs, as indicated by I<[!]>. The indicator will be yellow for warning conditions and red for errors.

=back

=cut
