[1mNAME[0m

[1mzfsbootmenu[0m - Main Screen

[1mKeyboard Shortcuts[0m

[33m[ENTER][0m [1mboot[0m
  Boot the selected boot environment, with the listed kernel and kernel command line visible
  at the top of the screen.

[33m[MOD+K][0m [1mkernels[0m
  Access a list of kernels available in the boot environment.

[33m[MOD+S][0m [1msnapshots[0m
  Access a list of snapshots of the selected boot environment. New boot environments can be
  created here.

[33m[MOD+D][0m [1mset bootfs[0m
  Set the selected boot environment as the default for the pool.

  The operation will fail gracefully if the pool can not be set [33mread/write[0m.

[33m[MOD+E][0m [1medit kcl[0m
  Temporarily edit the kernel command line that will be used to boot the chosen kernel in the
  selected boot environment. This change does not persist across reboots.

[33m[MOD+P][0m [1mpool status[0m
  View the health and status of each imported pool.

[33m[MOD+R][0m [1mrecovery shell[0m
  Execute a Bash shell with minimal tooling, enabling system maintenance.

[33m[MOD+J][0m [1mjump into chroot[0m
  Enter a chroot of the selected boot environment. The boot environment is mounted [33mread/write[0m
  if the zpool is imported [33mread/write[0m.

[33m[MOD+W][0m [1mimport read/write[0m
  If possible, the pool behind the selected boot environment is exported and then re-imported
  in [33mread/write[0m mode.

  This is not possible if any of the following conditions are met:

  * The version of ZFS in ZFSBootMenu has detected unsupported pool features, due to an
    upgraded pool.

  * The system has an active [1mresume[0m, indicating that the pool is currently in use.

  Upon successful re-import in [33mread/write[0m mode, each of the boot environments on this pool
  will be highlighted in [33mred[0m at the top of the screen.

[33m[MOD+O][0m [1msort order[0m
  Cycle the sorting key through the following list:

  [1mname[0m Use the filesystem or snapshot name
  [1mcreation[0m Use the filesystem or snapshot creation time
  [1mused[0m Use the filesystem or snapshot size

  The default sort key is [33mname[0m.

[33m[MOD+L][0m [1mview logs[0m
  View logs, as indicated by [33m[!][0m. The indicator will be yellow for warning conditions and red
  for errors.

[1mAUTHOR[0m

ZFSBootMenu Team <https://github.com/zbm-dev/zfsbootmenu>

